---
layout: post
title: RepRap and Automation
---
* bla
{:toc}

## 1. Comparing RepRap with automatation in factories.

Since this seem to be the major thrust of the article I will begin here. I think it's a comparison that hold in some sense. Yes, reprap is making some moments of production automaticed. But I think there are also major differences in what the automatation amounts to, so in the end I am skeptical to go with the analogy all the way. I'm going to spell out some of these differences that I see. My feeling is that reprap amount to something more similar to a farmer having an ox than a factory owner having an automated factory. This is because when viewing the full process the reprap takes care of some moments of the production but the operator still needs to deploy a large skillset, just like the farmer just can't let the ox plough the fields in anyway it pleases. I could say a tractor, but given the current state of personal fabricators they feel more like animals partly equiped with their own will power.

A central problem with comparing a CNC automated mass manufacturing production plant and a CNC personal fabrication machine is that the first is meant to produce the exact same product in massive numbers, while the latter is meant to be able to produce unique one-time objects designed to fit a specific local situation. At least this is their comparative advantage. If one tries to use a large setup of repraps like a mass-manufacturing plant, that logic applies, but this would fail to recognize the specific character of the reprap. Ironically this is what slef-reproducing the same repraps over and over amounts to as you also show with the case of the injection moulded parts.

In the factory case, all that is needed is a designer to write the instructions once. No need for skilled workers to actually perform the instructions. This would at best deskill them, at worst replace them. As a side note, this also means that the manufacturer desperately needs to protect the design with intellectual property since it would be the only this  differentiating this plant from another with the same machinery.

The reprap however is not meant to produce these economies of scale, in fact it is not very good at it. Injection moulding would be a better choice, since the reprap begins from zero everytime it creates an object. What we instead have to consider is that the skilled craftsman has been replaced by the skilled designer/fabricator. The major benefit of 3d-printing and other CNC fabricators is that each object made can be uniquely adpted to the specific situation that it is supposed to work for, just like skilled craftsman can do. This requires design decisions in every iteration. Going back to the analogy with the farmer. Even though the farmer can let the ox plow large fields all day but the farmer needs to sense the soil and the climate and determine what seeds to plant when and when to plough. The farmer becomes a manager or designer of the farming process, even though it is the animal that performs the hard work. So, my point is that the comparison with the automated factory would only fully hold true if the only this reprap operation was about was the actual process of producing an object following a strict design. I will get back to how to look at the process in the final section.

So in the end, no human labour is actually saved compared to mass fabrication, but rather the human labour is shifted from manual work (disregarding maintenace and construction) to design. And one could argue that this was also the case with the skilled craftsmen of old times. Their value was lay not (only) in the fact that their hands could execute an instruction perfectly, but that they were able to always make design decisions to adapt the material to the situation at hand. Instructions could therefor be looser and interpreted by the craftsman. 

Going back to the process of  automatising the mass manufacturing process, what was automated, like I hinted at in the beginning, was not just the actual manufacturing, but also the replication of design from one moment to the next. This is the first thing the automatation required, the process fo standardisation, from the parts of colt weapons to the t-ford and so on. In regards to this I think the reprap has an ambiguous position (just like the internet as a whole has). It can be used as a distributed maanufacturing of *the same*. Such as in the example yoou give of makerbot asking the makerbot operators to produce a specific pulley (and all the problems of quality control that ensures), but it can also be used to make design be senible to local conditions and variations. We see the same problem looking at information online which can both be a quick globally viral reproduction of the same information or have the ability to express differences. What the outcome will be is a different discusssion I guess. On the internet you have all the network theories like the long tail or the network effect trying to map how this plays out. Perhaps its part of the same battle over the everyday as the battle over what repraps actually will produce. 


## 2. Labour and value theory and critique in regards to RepRap

I also think that the automatisation debate need to be put in a perspective of the general development of profit within capitalism. I can't say I have full knowledge of these matters, but a tendency with increased efficieny in machinery is not only deskilling of workers but that large segments of the population is no longer useful for capital; that is, the inability of capital to utilize this gain in productivity to create the need for labour somewhere else. A figure that was at the centre of political struggle in 2011 was the unemployed young academic (/maker?), in London as well as Cairo and Madrid. I think the maker culture is somehow picking up on this directed to people with a lot of time on their hands but little resources. Perhaps the idea of this leading to a (capitalist) economic regeneration is missplaced (Bre, often talks about "america is manufacturing again"), but there is an interesting discussion here somewhere about the relation between usefulness and uselessness from the perspective of capital and new forms of production. I can't really put the finger on it yet, and this is more a general remark than critique of the text. A kind of productivity for the ones left out of the (job) market that sometimes becomes just pure waste of resources, sometimes, perhaps, something forming new kinds of relations of exchange. Can we think "making" as not having to do with growth, but art, life, constructing life worlds that capital then tries to recuperate and make useful for itself. I think you highlight this conflict very well. The way capital is trying to make this phenomena basically generate surplus value. 

But then the central conflict is not so much that automatisation gives the proletariat a worse position of negotiation versus capital when it comes to the rate of wages, thereby allowing capital bigger profits. Nor about entrepreneurs competing on the market. Instead, it is about whether production, or let's call it 'making', is going to be a part of the capitalist system of exchange at all or if it is used to directly create material wealth.

So, in other words, if the capitalist system can keep this conflict coonfined withing the frame of strength of respective position on the labour market, which in other words is within the frame of capitalist relations of exchange, then gain in productivity can always be transformed into something benefiting capital and the workers have nothing left to do than resist and be defensive of their current position (as wage labour). This is successfully done today with the combination of precarious labour conditions within the "flexicurity" model. But even a little bit of social democratic wellfare state is able to transform a bit of the gains in productivity (which in principal is the same as gains in access to fixed levels of productivity, i.e. cost per hour of abstract labour). And the present condition is certainly a testimony to the failures of capitalist societies (or at least of societies *dominated* by capitalism), that gains in productivity can not be translated in more direct creation of wealth, but instead becomes a expansion of capital.

The discussion of automation and loss of jobs is remeniscent of the discussions when the synthesizer was introduced and some musicians union (in britain i think) wanted to ban it on precisely these ground of deskilling the musician (now a ten-year-old could push a button to produce a string sound. No need to learn the violin for ten years!). In some sense they were right. A mucisian skilled in playing the violin has a harder time negotiating with capital because a deskilled synth player (or even a computer) can perform the score to some exent (minus some abstract "feeling").

But it also brought something else. Music that previously needed capital to be produced was made in bedrooms. It got us techno and raves. The previous division of labour of composer (designer) and skilled performer (skilled worker) conflated in to one role with different names such as artist, producer or DJ. Likewise I think personal fabrication in some sense make it impossible to differntiate a design phase from a manufacturing phase. 

Now, the history of electronic music from 1980's onward is far from a story of continous anti-capitalist rebellion. Not at least it gave rise to what we in regards to the internet call the prosumer -- someone who produces something that in itself does not become a capitalist commodity but does so in an environment that indirectly commodifies (data, users, eyeballs etc).


## 3. The emancipatory potential of RepRap, or the lack thereof

The reprap and other personal fabricators can not be understood by only considering this one machine in isolation. Rather, the question is in which socio-technical relations it is enacted in unison with. The state of 3D-printing today makes it most valuable as a support structure for other kinds of manufacturing that making more forms of production available with decreased costs in resources and knowledge to the extent that they open up for more social groups to engage in a increasingly wide range of productive practices; perhaps as a case for electronics or for producing gears in a machine. Very rarely is the value of an object printed and used in isolation so great. The reprap is therefor comparable to an ox, or to when electrical power tools became available.

What the 3D-printers replace is the process where digital design only has one way of becoming an object; which is manufacturing large runs in a (often southeast asian) factory with cheap labour. The uniquenes of objects and prototypes and the shorter cycles between design/manufacturing iterations is its benefits. The human skills it replaces is things that humans don't do very well and shouldn't either. One is following exact instructions. Luckily, the machines do this better than us. This is not the same as craft skills, which (whether they are valued better than industrial products or not) a machine is not able to reproduce very well, since it is not so good at sensing and knowing the material it is working with. The second is coming up with ideas that others have already come up with. The RepRap (or rather the ecosystem around it) does this by being able to copy others digital designs. 

In this light, I would like to think of how the idea of self-reproduction can be thought. We're not dealing with self-reproduction in the sense that humans or plants self-reproduce, I think. But neither, as you say, just a rethorical device. A truly self-reproducing machine -- self-reproducing in the way humans and plants slef-reproduce -- belongs to a completely different technological paradigm and can not be an extention of the reprap, with only more parts printed. It would have to be something more like a synthetic biological organism. So what does the self-reproduction amount to? In practice, I don't think it amounts to something very different from a hypothetical project that would have the ambition to make a machine that could perform a certain kind production and which was made entirely out of commonly accessible materials from junk yards. In both cases, the machine is something that can be buildt from locally sourced material and who's manufacturing is not controlled by a single entity and the manufacturing of neither machine can be stopped in a top down fashion. In that sense, the self-reproduction of the reprap is not so different from the "self-reproduction", let's say of improviced explosive devices. Both can be made with accessible material in a local situation and instructions for building and improving the device is shared online. The fact that the machine itself builds the material with the same process as it manufactures and that the isntructions are computer read rather than easy-to-follow human readable instructions , perhaps does not make it a fundamentally different kind of machine. Imagine for example that the reprap could only reproduce itself by first printing 3 devices other than itself who in turn made the parts necessary to make parts for the reprap. Would this change the argument fundamentally? 

I think the major impact of the reprap and similar projects is what they allow to be produced with what level of skill and with materials accessible to what degree. As long as it is actually not a device that can be left to its own devices and, by getting energy from materials in its surroundings, can reproduce itself infinitely (or unless it exhausts its resource base), I think it is hard to see self-reproduction as anything else than "can be buildt with local resources (and skills)". In the meantime, the reprap, especially as only one component in an assemblage of machinery, can serve a function in producing many kinds of productive tools and machinery that is just as or more elegant and useful than another reprap. 

In the meantime, I think you are correct in highlighting this tension between the hobbyist and the entrepreneur who need to compete on the market. And in this sense, I really apprechiated the section of the history of engineering culture and it sheds much light on the culture of reprap and similar projects. I particulary like the connection between the crisis of the engineering culture and the hobbyist community. This is worth exploring in more detail I think. Not at least the overlap and transition of individuals between the two.

I don't see the necessary utopian character of these kinds of machines functioning as tools for "collectives of associated producers" as you highlight in the quote from Braverman. Is it only that it does not realize that there is no use of doing anything because capital will eat it in the end? Or is it utopian because the manual, deskilled label shifts to the production of raw materials and basic components used in the machines? Certainly, the reprap is not a magical machine that can do away with the need to sell ones labour on the market, but there is at least a possibility that it can work to oppose this, paradoxically at the same time as it is also being used to gain some comparative advantage on the job market.

Maybe what I'm getting at is that the RepRap won't make anyone an entrepreneur more than anyhting else will. Becoming entrepreneurs is what everyone is forced to. Although only a few will succeed. The rest will end up unemployed or in FAS3. In fact, trying to become an entrepreneur with ones 3D printer is perhaps a last desperate attempt at not falling into unemployment. So I wonder if there is something entrepreneurish about the machine itself or if it's just that everyone is forced try to become entrepreneurish with whatever skills or tools they have. While this is going on, it also creates the possibility of using the same tools to try to create other forms of wealth.

These "collectives of associated producers" efforts often fail. Fail to attract critical mass, fail to generate either enough money or generating other kinds of social relations of exchange in sufficient degree. One reaction is that they should have done differently as to succeed (or the more depressing conclusion that there is no use). Another reaction is that they are doing everything right, this IS the future, but these early efforts collapse under the pressure of other social and economical mechanisms. But if that is the case, they can function as a critique. As a necessary failure. Not because they failed to understand the all encompassing power of capitalism, but because we are not there yet and more changes need to come about for them to be succesful. Huge changes in fact. But building and failing (quick and easy) is the best way of coming to understand where these obstacles are located.

In the end, the success or not of decentralized manufacturing has to do with the complexity of the everyday life and everyday social relations. A decentralized system is complex in a computational sense. If every object manufactured must be specifically adapted to a certain environment, then the decentralized way will win out. If on the other hand surroundings become standardised and regulated, centralized production can win by means of economies of scale. The replacement of the putting-out system with centralized manufacturing could not have been done without a reduction of complexity (in the form of standardised manufacturing and living). This reduction in complexity allowed for centralized manufacturing and thus deskilling of workers. You highlight something similar in the grey part of the conclusion regarding the complexity of programming tasks keeping the programmers relatively strong. Maybe the case is that 3D printers never come to their full potential in a society otherwise dominated by industrial manufacturing. They would need another future or an alternative present where their precision and local adaptability would actually be of use in everyday tasks.

I wonder, in the light of this, if recuperation must not always in some sense be seen as a victory. That capital in some way has been forced to do it, but would rather be spared the trouble. It can be an advantage for capital if the recuperation is not recognized as such though, but in general it is not good for it. 

Will they voices really come in the old style of managers and engineers, or does it only appear so because there is a cognitive dissonance if the conceptual tools we have is workers vs managers and engineers and we now stand in front of the emergence of new social roles. Just like the synthesizer player was seen as a lakej of the record companies and capital, something that seems absurd today.
