---
layout: post
title: Test PAndoc
summary: Testing Pandoc 
categories: tldr
---

While being inspired by Lessig's approach, my research topic forces me to look beyond his approach. "Code is law" can be called an intra-systemic perspective on code as regulation, to paraphrase systems theory. It works as long as you are dealing with code regulating code. Code regulates what happens inside computers and computer networks (including what is shown of a screen or played through speakers), but increasingly code and digital technologies are being more embedded in the outside world. The research on so called ubiquitous computing [@weiser:1991computer] and "Internet of Things" [@gershenfeld:2004internet] has been on the research agenda for over two decades, but it is since the release of the first smart phones and the following acceleration in development of miniaturization of computing power, increased quality and lower cost of sensors, improvements in battery capacity and not at least expansion, speed and accessibility of data transfer over radio (WiFi, 3G, 4G etc.) that this vision has come to influence everyday life. 

Starting then from the spaces where technology is one of several actors communicating with other social and technical systems, rather than with the internal operations of devices and networks themselves puts code in a new perspective. Kitchin [-@kitchin:2011code] has classified spaces into "coded spaces" which are transversed by information technology but does not depend on them -- for example the use of mobile phones and map software to navigate urban space -- and "code/space" where the code is constitutive of the social interactions taking place -- an example would be the check-in at an airport that would cease to function if the computers systems broke down. I both kinds of spaces, information technology and code are powerful actors shaping the social situation but unlike Lessig's Internet studies they are not "law"[^1]. Human bodies and other materialities can still resist the execution of code and not follow its scripts, although with the consequences of not being able to perform certain social actions that the code would enable.

There are clear parallels between how code is spatialized in these approaches and the way legal geography has spatialized and localized the applications of law. Legal geography has been used to study both the geographical differentiations in the application of legal concepts [@konzen:2013norms] and how space itself is constructed by law and how law itself is material and spatial [@braverman:2014expanding]. 

Urban spaces are some of the most studied spaces in legal geography [see for example @mihalopoulos:2007law and @konzen:2013norms]. Some research also exist on the restructuring of urban space due to information technologies [for example @graham:2004cybercities, @graham:2001splintering, @kitchin:2011code, @thrift:2002automatic, @zook:2007from]. Little research exist, however that combines these aspects and study the way legal geographical separations are enacted in technology.

 [^1]: Or perhaps the issue is with a narrow definition of what "law" is.
