---
layout: post
title: Democracy of objects I - Kant's backdoor
---

I'm reading Democracy of objects of Levi Bryant now. In it he develops a strand of object-oriented ontology that he calls "Ontocology" building on a number of sources, which apart from the obligatory object-oriented philosophy sources relies heavily on Deleuze, Luhmann and Lacan. The first third or so is also a good introduction to the general motivation and rationale of object-oriented philosphy (or speculative realism). Why all this speculation and why now? Sometimes people like to position Meillassoux as the one who kick-started the whole thing with his arguments in After finitude, but Brynat (rightly so I think) takes his departure from Roy Bhaskar. There is not so much talk about him (maybe because he doesn't have a blog), but I think his Realist Theory of Science (yes, VERY boring title) is a key to understanding the WHY and HOW COME of object-oriented philosophy (and/or speculative realism). It all has to do with Kant or course, who Meillassoux identifies as the evil mastermind behind "correlationism". But it is Bhaskar who tries to open a backdoor in Kant that will bring back ontology once again. Because it is important to understand that we're not just dealing with wild west speculation or beautiful pictures of the world here. We're dealing with an opening in philosophy that Bhaskar claims to have FOUND. I want to elaborate on this here. First I should say that I have not read Bhaskars book yet, although it rests in by book shelf, so I will base this on Bryants interpretation and use of Bhaskar. Comments of how me and/or Bryant have missunderstood hum are wlcome if you find such things.

## Kant
If kant is overturned, then we have a new philosophy. Whats at stake is if there are any conditions at all where we still can make ontological claim. Mind yiu, not epistemological claims, clains about what we know about the world, but claims about the world noy based on directly experiencing anf knowing them but logically infered from certain conditions we get from experience (this logic is the reason the analytical philosophy must be brought in). Maybe some people claim  victory too early, but ground has been cleared making it possible to attempt this problem, if it has not already succeeded.

The reason why this opening has been perceived as possible today is the insight that ontological claims are always conflated wih epistemological claims. They are deemed impossible on the ground that we do not have access to the world. But access is an epistemological problem. What if there was a possibility to reach ontological claims in another way. Then claims about the world would not just be pictures anymore. Then aesthetics would not be first philosophy any longer.

If reality is cut up from our minds, as kant says, then who cut up the mind in the first place?

[Question: The being of things is certainly independent of our access it but is really our claims about the being of things (ontological claims) independent of us accessing being?]

Poängen är inte att säga att Kant hade fel och därför är det fritt fram för metafysisk spekulation, snarare att Kant försökte stänga dörren till metafysisk spekulation helt och hållet (eller ville och ville, snarare tvingades till) men att det fortfarande finns möjligheter öppna under vissa specifika villkor.

What would a breakthrough like the overturning of Kant mean for philosophy? What effects would it have? The immediate effect would be that it would produce more philosophy.And philosophy of a kind that would not be just a variation of known structures.nor simply adding new images of thought (Kants a priori cathegories). It would be a breakthrough similar to a break in fundamental physics. And similarly, some of this.new philosophy it would be produced would be a pure philosophy trying to explore the space and find new limits and loopholes, while others would go toward becoming applied ohilosophy. Trickle over into political thought, sociology, art etc.

Harman does not radicalise kant, he makes ontological claims mimicing the structural qualities of kants epistemological claims.

Kant was not wring. He was right in the sense that we cant make ontological claims based on epistemological grounding. That is, we can export what we experience of the world to the ontolpgical domain of how the world is made up. However, what speculative realists claims, is that there are conditions under which we can make ontological claims without going the epistemological route. There is a backdoor in Kants philosophy. This distinction is important because if it would be that cant would be wrong, it would nan a free

Levi bryant recently wrote on his blog that materialists such as himself often get the critisicm that they dont have a good conception of matter. According to his answer, this is the way it is supposed to be because how can we humans, with out concepts get a true sense of what matter is? Here lies an important point on ontology. The purpose of n ontology is not to try to conceptualiz how reality actually is. Instead, ontological claims has a specific role to play where we can get a few ideas of how reality must be like in order for appearences to appear to us in a specific way. It is aboout what we can ontologically infer from epistemoloical senses, and the two are not the same, we can have ontological claims about what we dont know. 
I feel there is a problem with ooo sometimes that people get too trigger happy nd goes off on a tangent trying to describe what the think reality is like. But this is not the purpose of ontology!
