---
layout: post
title: Design and Social Justice 
summary: Reflections on relation between design baszed politics and politics of social justice.
categories: 
---

So far, these design-based politics has been seen as luxury problems, or at and more long-term than the emergency-oriented political problems of social justice. These has been based on ideas of recognition and demands on powerful actors such as state or corporations and there is a disjoint between the two where design-oriented work solves and intervenes in long-term but not acute problems while social justice is about the here and now. Together with this comes a notion that for someone to be able to spend time worrying about the long-term design-oriented problems, they must have it pretty good at the moment, otherwise their time would be pre-occupied by more immediate concerns. And there is some grain of truth in this since design-oriented political problems has been dealt with by people from the design professions (understood broadly), by academics or otherwise by people with a relatively priviledged position in society. This does not lead to the conclusion that they are lesser problems that also are of concern for the already well-being though. The concerns could very well be severe, global and affect the most vurnerable first. However they are issues that require freely disposed time to engage with and that require some kind of expert knowledge. Take the issue of climate change for example. Many people have more pressing concerns to worry about than worrying about climate change. Needs that need to be taken care of immediately and can't be postponed to worry about such a drawn out problem as climate change. Yet, the latest IPCC report makes it very clear that climate change will affect the most vurnerable communities first with floodings, draught and other devastating consequences. It is thus not a "luxury problem", although it is a problem that only a few can "afford" to care about. 

There is a need to identify and be clear about which of these problems truly are luxury problems and which are profound problems that needs to be adressed. This is not always evident from a brief look at the problems or proposed solutions. Overlooking socio-ecological consequences of socio-technical change can be difficult to predict and understand in its complex, systemic character. Unintended and unforseen consequences of technology are often greater than their intended consequences. But the task is an important one because it is about how to make use of a precious reseource, which is people who are still able to gather up time and energy to adress these problems. Their potential should not be wasted.

This does put the political ideas of top-down and bottom-up on its side. The idea here is that top-down is bad because it involves powerful actors with their inherit world views trying to solve problems for less powerful actors. This is only good if there is true representation or that the powerful have listened to demands coming from the "bottom". Bottom-up on the other hand is good because it involves people acting out of their own life situation and needs which is only truly understood and can be guaranteed by them. The design-oriented politics however is different because it acts upon *future* needs and risks where consequences in one area and for one group is caused by problems created elsewhere or on a systemic level (think climate change again). Identifying these future needs and risks can not be done solely by a local experience in one place and time. As things look today in a society where time, energy and resources are divided unequally there must be a differentiation in roles here with designer/community. There is a need for collaboration between these roles in the adaption to the future needs and risks and even in the evaluation of them. But as things stand today these roles can't be completely one and the same.	

Why then does "socially engaged design" or "critical design" so often fail in articulating relevant needs and risks? And can there be improved methodologies or structures in order to get better results? Or can the expertise of these professions simply be bypassed? The problem can be located on different levels. One is with designers themselves. Their world-views are self-centered and their capacity for empathy with others are limited. Therefor they design for themselves and only of others problems happen to coincide with themselves are there solutions usable for others. In some sense this is true, design is a creative practice and creativity needs to emerge out of an intuitive act, but can be strucutred differently. Designers can engage in co-production where others are involved in identifying needs and risks and the designer is the one iterating design suggestions. The problem could also be located further up the hierarchy in that designers always work in an economic context where certain projects get funding and others not. Economic structures and incentives organise the work of designer towards certain clients or solutions. The inability of designers to engage in long-term projects makes them prone to quick fixes. The problem could also be located with design itself which due to these structures tend to be technology-centered and opt for solutions that has "viable business models" rather than design aiming to make communities self-sustaining and resilient by their own reproducable means.

Another important area are health and medicine where there are plenty of patient-led movements with expert support. This has also been a long-standing research area of STS. Here there is also examples on non-scientists or non-technologists able to exert influence over science and technology, not just the other way around through expert knowledge.