---
layout: post
title: Thought on the DARPA + MAKE project MENTOR
---

There has been interesting discussions going on about a project called MENTOR where MAKE and Otherlab will get funding from DARPA to do an educational project for high school kids. The controversy has simplistically stated been about taking military funding and its influence on education vs. the need to educate kids on modern forms of making and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics). You can read more about it here. Ref Copyriot plus articles from readitlater archive and MAKEs own article.

I have had some discussions about this maily offline so I wrote down my thoughts on it and on STEM education, funding and strings in general. 

Brief overview. DARPA challenge. The Make proposal. The actual content of the project is unknown to me at the time. Various sources claim different things. Claims of competitions vs. claims of MAKE that it is completely general. 

Since I don't have enough information yet. This will be a more general take on funding, strings attached and the universality and politics of STEM education. I will try to write IF the MENTOR program would do this or that in the text but if I forget it somewhere this is what I really mean.

Just a quick note before we begin. One argument that has been taken up in defence of DARPA is that they buildt the internet, so how can one critizise them ON the internet without being a hypocrite. Re: DARPA build the (proto-)internet. Industrialisation is buildt on slavery. Relying on industrial outcomes does not excuse slavery, however its origins (and present conditions) should be taken into account. And we should think if we cannot do it without these as well? 

The first information that came out was not just that DARPA would finance the project, but that they would also have influence over the contents. It was claimed that it would be based on challenges where schools would compete to build military style technologies. This has later been disputed by MAKE in a blog post. Were this the case however, the project would be just as bad if it was self-financed. This is my first point about this whole controversy. To me it is not primarily about taking money from DARPA. These money is not per se different than any other money, as the universal equivalent that money is. It can be damaging to be dependent on money from a single source which gives that source leverage, but this is the case of all money. The problem with the project fi this information would be correct would be teaching children a weaponized version of STEM. And the militarization of technology -- direct of indirect, conscious or unconscious -- is a much broader problem than projects directly financed by military research money. 

Just looking at the source of the funding confuses things. First, it does not distinguish between direct, applied research as in this case and genreal funding of basic research or general education, which -- while not being a neutral selection -- has a broader range of applicable fields. Second, it fails to realize that the militarization (and commodificaiton) of technology happens on broader cultural levels, even without funding. It's a broader cultural issue of how technology is framed and should be questioned on a general level. What is the impact of our mainstream technology development as a whole? What does it contribute to? Environmental damage, energy dependence, global power relations, war over energy resources and blood minerals. The innocence was not destroyed with the DARPA funding. So instead of saying "stop complaining, you are writing this on the internet which DARPA build", one could say: "Stop compleining, just by writing this on the internet you are contributing to war over blood minerals and energy resources". 

The problem of directed research funding is also a broader problem where less research in universities is funded by faculty means and more is directed project research. And this don't even take into account the amount of research that has moved to corporate research labs.

It goes back to the idea that teaching science and engineering is about teaching a universal skillset that is completely neutral and apolitical. Perhaps this was more true before when engineering was about teaching a basic set of engineerign skills (se retooling). But today engineering and its place in society has changed dramatically. If STEM educated youth solve problems -- who defines them? The military? Who with an open mind, not taking any nations interest over another, will define the global problems STEM-skills will solve?

Our society is full of self-reinforcing feedback loops, like massive whirlwinds. If we are close to one of the strong ones and try to resist them it can be tough to get any momentum what so ever going. Everything brought in, except the firm core will be swept up by it. Perhaps one need to make use of the feedback to get ones own initiative going, without therefor loosing oneself in the whirlwind. As Tristan Garcia writes, there is responsible and cowardly betrayls of principles. The responsible one is forming an allience one is akward with in order to untimately strengthen and support ones principal community. The cowardly betrayl is about taking refuge in the whirlwind as a comfort zone. Tristan has the examples of a radical gay rights activist cooperating with the state to get AIDS prevention program going and the french philosophers who retreated into social conservatism respectively as examples of this in his novel "Hate: a romance".

Maybe the situation in the US is so messed up that it is only by doing initiatives within a broad framework of "national security" that anything can be done at all. Just like we in Europe often have to motivate things as innovation or entrepreneurship. This does not seem to be the case with MENTOR though, since it is the content of the project that is the problem, not that an all in all good project gets funded by the military. 

If DARPA would simply have given money to public schools for STE(A)M initiatives with no strings attached since they think they will benefit from a general level of improved STEM skills in the US, that would have been fine (although one would hope that the politicians would be able to get these money to schools without going through the military). Maybe even a DARPA logo here and there would have been fine. That would just have been a matter of weighing costs vs. benefits. But the MENTOR program is not about costs on one side of a balance sheet and benefits of the other. It even distorts the supposed benefit of a STEM education, at worst having an opposite effect of what was intended -- less people working with technology for the better of mankind. 

The situation is different from the one during the cold war. STEM education has never been neutral, but always privilegded motivated by some form of national interest. But the space age competition vs. the soviet union brought a more general STEM education that what is the case with this program. This was not true of the advanced level of course with things like the Manhattan Project. 

If the MENTOR program would have been about funding STEM education in general ti would have been a "fair" cultural battle for those minds. And of course, the military, with its enormous resources has a strong appeal to technology geeks. They *do* get to work on a wide variety of intellectually challenging and complex problems with global impact with almost unlimited resources at their disposal. That *is* appealing. And that is also why the success of hackerspaces, providing a different ethics and appeal with very limited reasources, is such a great accomplishment. 

The problem with MENTOR is not only the cultural influnce of militarizaiton, but the seemingly narrow possible applications of the skills involved. I think we could win the cultural war is it was only a question of that, but the military also has a resource base to back up their cultural position. 

The militarization is a broader problem of engineering culture and its purely technical focus on solving interesting technical problems. There is a reason why it is called *civil* engineering... 

Maybe in order to evaluate the MENTOR program we have to understand how mainstream engineering culture works. It has changed alot since the cold war. No longer does an engineer simply learn a set of technical skills. Engineering culture has become "humanized" (maybe even "feminized") in that organisation and communication skills now accompany the technical ones. An extension of this is the idea of STEAM, which also wants to include artistic and creative skills into technical education. The hackerspace movement can be said to further contribute to this by adding an ethics of sharing an openess and in some cases even a politication of the outcomes of technological production. 

Technology education and tech skills is not neutral because technology is not neutral. That is not to say that each technology carries with it a single political bias or possible social application. And therefor we should not only use kinds of technology as political compass. But different technologies do have different phase spaces that they are able to actualize. Hackerspaces are held together because they share skills within a phase space that they are all able to operate within. 

Hackerspaces should promote openess and accessibility of technology for everyone. They don't have to have an advanced political stance beyond this. Simply providing this open space makes it into a platform for questioning our relation to technology. A shared resource base makes it possible for someone working on sustainable manufacturing processes to cooperate with someone just doing it for the intellectual challenge. Of course, there will be times when there are frictions between these, but the hackerspace movement has the potential to still keep this friction withing the same, although antagonistic, space and maintain itself despite internal contradicitons. It would be a shame if lack of consensus created a rift in the community. It should stick together, but without the idea of false consensus. 
