---
layout: post
title: Utforskande av 3D-skrivande
---

Efter at tha haft 3d-skrivare i över ett år nu och använt den till och från har en ny vänding i dess användande visat sig. Det är en fantastiskt maskin för tänkandet som konceptuellt stället mycket på sin spets. 

Ens förhålland etill 3d-skrivande tar sig normalt igenom ett antal stadier. 

- Det först stadiet innebär att alla möjligheter uppenbarar sig. 3d-skrivaren framstår som en magisk maskin som ska förverkliga alla en s drömmar, stötta ens kreativitet och komma alla till nytta. Man börjar fundera på vad det egentligen innebär att 3d-skrivare gör att alla har tillgång till tillverkning av vad som helst. Hur kan omgivningar, praktiker och städer förändras genom detta nya paradigm? Detta stadiets förgyllda tillvaro krossas ofta av alla de timmar det krävs för att få den att ens skriva ut ok delar.
- Nästa stadie kommer med en mycket större försiktighet. Till en början har en massa testobjekt skrivits ut samt saker för skojs skull, bara för att testa hur det känns. I detta stdiet kommer en känsla av att 3d-skrivaren kanske ska vara till någon nytta också. Därför börjar man fundera på vad som egentligen skulle vara användbart att skriva ut. Vad kan man inte skapa eller få tillgång till på andra sätt, vad skulle man annars behöva betala dyra pengar för eller framkta över hela jordklotet. Dess användningsområde preciseras och då krymper också drömmarna om 3d-skrivaren som världens räddning. Man börjar inse begränsningarna i tilvlekrning med monomaterial där form påförs utifrån. Man inser begränsningarna i materialet och i den komplexiteten som är realistisk att få till. Kort sagt upptäcker man att sådant som finns i ens omgivning faktiskt är rätt komplext och varken enkelt att modellera eller skriva ut.
- Det tredje stadiet börjar med en uppgivenhet. En känsla av att allt som man skriver ut är skräp. Det är bara en lång rulle plats som väms upp och formas till massa trams. Det är baserat på fossilt bränsle i form av olja och den drar 40w för användningen. Mycket skulle lika gärna kunna göras för hand. Och är det verkligen fler små plastprodukter som behövs i världen? Är i själva verket 3d-skrivande bara ett sätt att distribuera den apokalyps som den industriella tillverkningen för oss mot? Vad är skillnaden om det är ett fåtal fabriker som gör detta eller som alla deltar i apokalypsens frammaning?
- Det fjärde stadiet är en fortsättning på det tredje i det att man inser att det mesta man omger sig med bara är skräp. Den mest så kallade kreativitet och kommunikation tjänar ingenting till och leder bara vidare mot apokalypsen. Här någonstans öppnar sig vägskälet. Det kommer här att finnas en moralistisk väg att vandra och en post-apokalyptisk. 
- Det femte stadiet infinner sig när det moraliska vägskälet har övervunnits och apokalypsen affirmeras. Ja, 3d-skrivande ÄR apokalypsen, men apokalypsen behövs för att bootstrappa framtiden. 3D-skrivande fungerar som stöd-struktur till för framtiden. Det är en del av den industriella tillverkningens döda form av tillverkning men den gör sig bäst som ett stelt stödben till levande och mjuka tekniker. Det är industriell tillvekrning som är tekniskt och social utformad på ett sådant sätt att den tillåter framtidens teknik att komma fram.

När det femte stadiet nåtts har man nått en mogen syn på 3d-skrivartekniken som hittat sin plats i en designprocess där kombinationen av material och tekniker är det centrala. 3d-skrivandet behövs på samma sätt som det behövs gå åt fossila bränslen för att bygga strukturer för att fånga in solenergi. Hemma hos oss har vi börjat experimentera med att använda 3d-skrivna sktrukturer som stödstrukturer och ramverk åt stickning. Detta går också att kombinera med elektronik. Gör man det följer man Dominic Murens design-ramverk "Skin, skeleton, guts". Där stickningen utgör skinnet som stöds av det 3d-skrivna skelettet som i sin tur härbärgar de elektroniska inre organen. Denna kombinatoriska design möjliggör också att delar av strukturerna omformas och byts ut utan att helheten måste förkastas. En ny 3d-skriven stödstruktur kan med en ny stickning tillåta en ny form till objektet. En möjlig integration mellan 3d-skrivande och levande material skulle kunna vara att använda 3d-skrivna strukturer för att leda bambuväxters och liknande växters utväxt till en önskad form. 

Sett ur det här perspektivet får 3d-skrivande en given roll i framtida utforskande av tillverkningsmetoder men ses inte som en universell lösning. Faktiskt fungerar den som en påminnelse om att det inte kommer att finnas någon universell lösning överhuvudtaget utan att det krävs känsla för den specifika situationens behov.

Så här skrev jag på samma tema i kommentarer jag gav till Johan Söderberg på en artikel han skrivit om RepRap (ska lägga upp hela svaret en annan gång):

3. The emancipatory potential of RepRap, or the lack thereof

The reprap and other personal fabricators can not be understood by only considering this one machine in isolation. Rather, the question is in which socio-technical relations it is enacted in unison with. The state of 3D-printing today makes it most valuable as a support structure for other kinds of manufacturing that making more forms of production available with decreased costs in resources and knowledge to the extent that they open up for more social groups to engage in a increasingly wide range of productive practices; perhaps as a case for electronics or for producing gears in a machine. Very rarely is the value of an object printed and used in isolation so great. The reprap is therefor comparable to an ox, or to when electrical power tools became available.

What the 3D-printers replace is the process where digital design only has one way of becoming an object; which is manufacturing large runs in a (often southeast asian) factory with cheap labour. The uniquenes of objects and prototypes and the shorter cycles between design/manufacturing iterations is its benefits. The human skills it replaces is things that humans don't do very well and shouldn't either. One is following exact instructions. Luckily, the machines do this better than us. This is not the same as craft skills, which (whether they are valued better than industrial products or not) a machine is not able to reproduce very well, since it is not so good at sensing and knowing the material it is working with. The second is coming up with ideas that others have already come up with. The RepRap (or rather the ecosystem around it) does this by being able to copy others digital designs. 

In this light, I would like to think of how the idea of self-reproduction can be thought. We're not dealing with self-reproduction in the sense that humans or plants self-reproduce, I think. But neither, as you say, just a rethorical device. A truly self-reproducing machine -- self-reproducing in the way humans and plants slef-reproduce -- belongs to a completely different technological paradigm and can not be an extention of the reprap, with only more parts printed. It would have to be something more like a synthetic biological organism. So what does the self-reproduction amount to? In practice, I don't think it amounts to something very different from a hypothetical project that would have the ambition to make a machine that could perform a certain kind production and which was made entirely out of commonly accessible materials from junk yards. In both cases, the machine is something that can be buildt from locally sourced material and who's manufacturing is not controlled by a single entity and the manufacturing of neither machine can be stopped in a top down fashion. In that sense, the self-reproduction of the reprap is not so different from the "self-reproduction", let's say of improviced explosive devices. Both can be made with accessible material in a local situation and instructions for building and improving the device is shared online. The fact that the machine itself builds the material with the same process as it manufactures and that the isntructions are computer read rather than easy-to-follow human readable instructions , perhaps does not make it a fundamentally different kind of machine. Imagine for example that the reprap could only reproduce itself by first printing 3 devices other than itself who in turn made the parts necessary to make parts for the reprap. Would this change the argument fundamentally? 

I think the major impact of the reprap and similar projects is what they allow to be produced with what level of skill and with materials accessible to what degree. As long as it is actually not a device that can be left to its own devices and, by getting energy from materials in its surroundings, can reproduce itself infinitely (or unless it exhausts its resource base), I think it is hard to see self-reproduction as anything else than "can be buildt with local resources (and skills)". In the meantime, the reprap, especially as only one component in an assemblage of machinery, can serve a function in producing many kinds of productive tools and machinery that is just as or more elegant and useful than another reprap. 

In the meantime, I think you are correct in highlighting this tension between the hobbyist and the entrepreneur who need to compete on the market. And in this sense, I really apprechiated the section of the history of engineering culture and it sheds much light on the culture of reprap and similar projects. I particulary like the connection between the crisis of the engineering culture and the hobbyist community. This is worth exploring in more detail I think. Not at least the overlap and transition of individuals between the two.

I don't see the necessary utopian character of these kinds of machines functioning as tools for "collectives of associated producers" as you highlight in the quote from Braverman. Is it only that it does not realize that there is no use of doing anything because capital will eat it in the end? Or is it utopian because the manual, deskilled label shifts to the production of raw materials and basic components used in the machines? Certainly, the reprap is not a magical machine that can do away with the need to sell ones labour on the market, but there is at least a possibility that it can work to oppose this, paradoxically at the same time as it is also being used to gain some comparative advantage on the job market.

Maybe what I'm getting at is that the RepRap won't make anyone an entrepreneur more than anyhting else will. Becoming entrepreneurs is what everyone is forced to. Although only a few will succeed. The rest will end up unemployed or in FAS3. In fact, trying to become an entrepreneur with ones 3D printer is perhaps a last desperate attempt at not falling into unemployment. So I wonder if there is something entrepreneurish about the machine itself or if it's just that everyone is forced try to become entrepreneurish with whatever skills or tools they have. While this is going on, it also creates the possibility of using the same tools to try to create other forms of wealth.

These "collectives of associated producers" efforts often fail. Fail to attract critical mass, fail to generate either enough money or generating other kinds of social relations of exchange in sufficient degree. One reaction is that they should have done differently as to succeed (or the more depressing conclusion that there is no use). Another reaction is that they are doing everything right, this IS the future, but these early efforts collapse under the pressure of other social and economical mechanisms. But if that is the case, they can function as a critique. As a necessary failure. Not because they failed to understand the all encompassing power of capitalism, but because we are not there yet and more changes need to come about for them to be succesful. Huge changes in fact. But building and failing (quick and easy) is the best way of coming to understand where these obstacles are located.

In the end, the success or not of decentralized manufacturing has to do with the complexity of the everyday life and everyday social relations. A decentralized system is complex in a computational sense. If every object manufactured must be specifically adapted to a certain environment, then the decentralized way will win out. If on the other hand surroundings become standardised and regulated, centralized production can win by means of economies of scale. The replacement of the putting-out system with centralized manufacturing could not have been done without a reduction of complexity (in the form of standardised manufacturing and living). This reduction in complexity allowed for centralized manufacturing and thus deskilling of workers. You highlight something similar in the grey part of the conclusion regarding the complexity of programming tasks keeping the programmers relatively strong. Maybe the case is that 3D printers never come to their full potential in a society otherwise dominated by industrial manufacturing. They would need another future or an alternative present where their precision and local adaptability would actually be of use in everyday tasks.

I wonder, in the light of this, if recuperation must not always in some sense be seen as a victory. That capital in some way has been forced to do it, but would rather be spared the trouble. It can be an advantage for capital if the recuperation is not recognized as such though, but in general it is not good for it. 

Will they voices really come in the old style of managers and engineers, or does it only appear so because there is a cognitive dissonance if the conceptual tools we have is workers vs managers and engineers and we now stand in front of the emergence of new social roles. Just like the synthesizer player was seen as a lakej of the record companies and capital, something that seems absurd today.
